\input texinfo   @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
@c
@c Bravais Next — evaluation of the 2026-06-17 flake-structure proposal and the
@c go-forward roadmap.  Builds clean with:  makeinfo --no-split bravais-next.texi
@c %**start of header
@setfilename bravais-next.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@settitle Bravais Next — Flake Evolution Roadmap
@c %**end of header

@set PROJECT Bravais
@set VERSION r1
@set UPDATED 2026-06-24
@set SUBDOMAIN https://Bravais.SpacecraftSoftware.org/

@copying
@value{PROJECT} Next (revision @value{VERSION}, updated @value{UPDATED}) is the
evaluation of the external @cite{Bravais Nix Flake Structure Improvement Plan}
(dated 2026-06-17) and the prioritised roadmap that follows from it.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Mohamed Hammad & Spacecraft Software.

@quotation
This document is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
4.0 International License (CC-BY-SA-4.0).  To view a copy of this licence,
visit @url{https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/}.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Spacecraft Software
@direntry
* Bravais Next: (bravais-next).   Evaluation & roadmap for the Bravais flake.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title @value{PROJECT} Next
@subtitle Flake-Structure Proposal Evaluation & Roadmap
@subtitle Revision @value{VERSION} --- @value{UPDATED}
@author Mohamed Hammad
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

Maintained by Mohamed Hammad
@email{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}.
@*
@uref{@value{SUBDOMAIN}}
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{PROJECT} Next

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::        What this document is and where it came from.
* Method::              How the proposal was evaluated.
* Repository State::    The verified current state of the flake.
* Corrections::         Factual errors in the source proposal.
* Evaluation::          Per-suggestion validity verdicts.
* Roadmap::             What to do, in priority order.
* Quick Wins::          The Tier 1 changes applied now.
* Index::               Complete index.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex source proposal
This document evaluates an external proposal --- the @cite{Bravais Nix Flake
Structure Improvement Plan}, an HTML report dated 2026-06-17 --- against the
@emph{actual} state of the Bravais flake, and distils the result into a
go-forward roadmap.

The proposal makes sixteen structural recommendations (a thin @file{flake.nix},
a generated CPU/channel matrix, exported modules, a profiles layer, a package
catalogue, and more).  Several are sound.  Others are built on a
@strong{stale or speculative snapshot} of the repository and do not match what
is on disk today.

@cindex key finding
The cardinal finding: @emph{the source proposal must not be relayed
uncritically}.  This document classifies every suggestion as @dfn{adopt},
@dfn{adopt with modification}, @dfn{defer}, or @dfn{reject}, with the reasoning
grounded in concrete file references, and then orders the survivors by value and
risk.

@node Method
@chapter Method

@cindex method
@cindex evaluation criteria
Each suggestion was checked by reading the live tree --- @file{flake.nix},
@file{modules/}, @file{hosts/}, @file{users/}, @file{overlays/}, and
@file{README.md} --- rather than trusting the proposal's description of it.

The weighting follows The Steelbore Standard priority hierarchy (Standard
@samp{S3}): @strong{stability and correctness rank first}.  A change that
removes a latent bug, a drift trap, or an ambiguity outranks a change whose only
payoff is speculative reuse by a hypothetical future distribution.  A
single-machine personal configuration does not pay the carrying cost of
abstractions that only amortise across many machines or many consumers.

Verdicts use four levels:

@table @asis
@item @strong{Adopt}
Valid and worth doing; low risk.
@item @strong{Adopt (modified)}
The underlying problem is real, but the fix is lighter or differently shaped
than the proposal's.
@item @strong{Defer}
Sound in principle, but the trigger condition (a second machine, real external
reuse, painful drift) has not arrived.
@item @strong{Reject}
Contradicts a deliberate design decision, or rests on a factual error.
@end table

@node Repository State
@chapter Repository State

@cindex repository state, verified
The following facts were confirmed by direct reading and anchor every verdict in
@ref{Evaluation}.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@file{flake.nix} is 182 lines and already lean; @code{mkBravais} is a 57-line
inline function (it does @emph{not} need extracting into @file{lib/}).
@item
The configuration outputs are @code{bravais-thinkpad},
@code{bravais-thinkpad-unstable}, and the @code{bravais} alias.  There is
@strong{no} @code{bravais-v1}@dots{}@code{v4} matrix; the x86-64 march level is
@strong{pinned per host} (the ThinkPad's i7-8665U is @samp{v3}).
@item
The stable channel is @code{nixos-26.05}; @code{kimi-cli} is commented out, not
an active input.
@item
@code{users.users.mj} is @strong{duplicated}: the active definition is in
@file{hosts/common.nix} (and includes the @samp{seat} group), while
@file{users/mj/default.nix} holds a dead, unimported copy that has drifted (it
is missing @samp{seat}).
@item
@file{modules/packages/system.nix} mixes pure packages with services and
compatibility layers --- @code{virtualisation.podman}, @code{programs.appimage},
and @code{services.flatpak.enable}.  The Flatpak service is
@strong{double-declared}: @file{modules/packages/flatpak.nix} already owns it,
properly gated behind its own toggle.
@item
The flake exposes only @code{nixosConfigurations}.  There are no
@code{formatter}, @code{devShells}, @code{checks}, @code{nixosModules}, or
@code{overlays} outputs.
@item
The Steelbore palette is duplicated: an inline @code{steelborePalette} in
@file{flake.nix} and an unused copy in @file{lib/default.nix}, with a naming
drift (@code{liquidCool} in the repo versus @code{liquidCoolant} in the
proposal).
@item
@file{README.md} carries a hand-maintained package table (185 packages, 57.8%
Rust-first) that will drift as the inventory changes.
@end itemize

@node Corrections
@chapter Corrections

@cindex corrections to the source proposal
Three of the proposal's load-bearing premises are simply out of date.  They are
recorded here so the report is not mistaken for an endorsement of them.

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Channel.}  The proposal's example @file{flake.nix} pins
@code{nixos-25.11} and lists @code{kimi-cli} as an input.  The repository tracks
@code{nixos-26.05}, and @code{kimi-cli} is commented out.
@item
@strong{CPU matrix.}  The proposal's flagship recommendation generates
@code{bravais-v1}@dots{}@code{v4} per channel from a matrix function.  No such
outputs exist; march is pinned per host by deliberate design.
@item
@strong{Thin flake.}  The proposal argues for shrinking @file{flake.nix} by
moving @code{mkBravais} into @file{lib/}.  The flake is already small and
auditable; the move would add indirection without removing weight.
@end enumerate

@node Evaluation
@chapter Evaluation

@cindex verdict table
The verdicts, keyed to the section numbers in the source proposal:

@multitable @columnfractions .07 .31 .19 .43
@headitem Pr. @tab Suggestion @tab Verdict @tab Why
@item S6
@tab Generate a CPU v1--v4 / channel matrix
@tab @strong{Reject}
@tab Contradicts a deliberate design --- no v1--v4 outputs; march pinned per
host.
@item S5
@tab Make @file{flake.nix} thin (move @code{mkBravais} to @file{lib/})
@tab @strong{Reject}
@tab Already lean (182 lines); example uses the stale 25.11 + @code{kimi-cli}.
@item S15
@tab Formatter / dev shell / checks
@tab @strong{Adopt now}
@tab Absent, cheap, high value; fix bogus @code{v1}/@code{v4} check refs.
@item S12
@tab Centralise user + Home Manager
@tab @strong{Adopt now}
@tab Real duplication and drift trap.
@item S13
@tab Split packages / services / compat
@tab @strong{Adopt}
@tab Real mixing; the Flatpak double-declare is a latent decoupling bug.
@item S9
@tab Centralise the palette
@tab @strong{Adopt (modified)}
@tab Real duplication + naming drift; single-source it, drop the module-option
weight.
@item S8
@tab Split hardware (vendor) from platform (ISA flags)
@tab @strong{Adopt (modified)}
@tab @file{intel.nix} genuinely mixes microcode with march/@code{RUSTFLAGS};
keep march pinned.
@item S11
@tab Desktop primary/extras + assertions
@tab @strong{Adopt (assertions only)}
@tab Kitchen-sink is intentional; add guard assertions, do not force
exclusivity.
@item S10
@tab Profiles layer
@tab @strong{Defer}
@tab Host is already lean; @file{common.nix} already serves as the profile.
@item S7
@tab Export modules / overlays
@tab @strong{Defer}
@tab Only worth it for real external reuse; modules are tightly coupled.
@item S14
@tab Package catalogue + generated docs
@tab @strong{Defer}
@tab Stats will drift, but a full catalogue for 185 packages is heavy; a count
script is lighter.
@item S4
@tab Full directory reorganisation
@tab @strong{Defer (partial)}
@tab Heavy for a single-machine personal config; adopt sub-parts individually.
@end multitable

@cindex strengths of the proposal
The proposal's strengths are real and worth affirming: it correctly identifies
the hardware/platform conflation (@pxref{Roadmap}), the kitchen-sink desktop
model, the package/service mixing, and the hand-maintained statistics as genuine
issues.  The disagreement is about which fixes are proportionate to a personal,
single-machine distribution --- and about the factual premises in
@ref{Corrections}.

@node Roadmap
@chapter Roadmap

@cindex roadmap
@cindex tiers
The survivors, ordered by value and risk.

@menu
* Tier 1::      Adopt now --- low risk, high value.
* Tier 2::      Adopt soon --- sound, moderate effort.
* Tier 3::      Defer --- conditional on a trigger.
* Rejected::    Not pursued.
@end menu

@node Tier 1
@section Tier 1 --- Adopt now

@cindex Tier 1
Low-risk, high-value changes applied in the same pass as this document
(@pxref{Quick Wins} for the mechanics):

@itemize @bullet
@item
Add @code{formatter}, @code{devShells}, and @code{checks} flake outputs, with
the checks referencing the @emph{real} @code{bravais-thinkpad} and
@code{bravais-thinkpad-unstable} configurations.
@item
De-duplicate the @code{mj} user account into a single owning module.
@item
Remove the redundant Flatpak service declaration so Flatpak has one owner.
@end itemize

@node Tier 2
@section Tier 2 --- Adopt soon

@cindex Tier 2
Sound improvements of moderate effort, queued behind Tier 1:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@strong{Single-source the palette.}  Make @file{flake.nix} import one canonical
colour definition and delete the unused, drifted copy in @file{lib/default.nix}.
This is the @emph{lightweight} form of proposal S9 --- a data file, not a module
option read through @code{config}.
@item
@strong{Split hardware from platform (S8).}  Separate CPU-vendor settings
(@code{kvm-intel}, microcode) from x86-64 ISA / compiler-flag policy
(@code{marchLevel}, @code{RUSTFLAGS}, LTO) so an AMD machine would not require
rewriting the whole module.  The march level stays @strong{pinned per host}.
@item
@strong{Desktop guard assertions (S11).}  Keep all desktops enableable, but add
assertions and documentation around the X11/Wayland interplay (LeftWM
unconditionally enables X11 today, with no guard).
@item
@strong{Relocate services/compat out of @file{system.nix} (S13).}  Move
@code{virtualisation.podman} and @code{programs.appimage} into dedicated
service/compat modules so a @samp{packages} module installs packages only.
@end itemize

@node Tier 3
@section Tier 3 --- Defer

@cindex Tier 3
@cindex trigger conditions
Each of these is reasonable @emph{once a trigger arrives}:

@table @asis
@item Profiles layer (S10)
Trigger: a second machine, or a meaningfully different system personality.
@item Export modules and overlays (S7)
Trigger: a real external consumer of the Bravais modules.
@item Generated package report (S14)
Trigger: the hand-maintained statistics become painful to keep accurate; a small
count script is the cheaper first step before a full catalogue.
@item Broad directory reorganisation (S4)
Trigger: Tier 2 and the deferred items converge on it; otherwise the churn is
not justified.
@end table

@node Rejected
@section Rejected

@cindex rejected suggestions
@itemize @bullet
@item
@strong{CPU v1--v4 matrix (S6)} --- contradicts the per-host march pin, a
documented and deliberate decision.
@item
@strong{Thin-flake extraction (S5)} --- the flake is already lean; the premise
rests on the stale snapshot.
@end itemize

@node Quick Wins
@chapter Quick Wins

@cindex quick wins
@cindex Tier 1 implementation
The three Tier 1 changes, as applied.

@section Flake quality outputs

@cindex formatter
@cindex checks
@cindex dev shell
Added to the output set of @file{flake.nix}, reusing the existing @code{system}
binding and @code{self}.  The formatter is @code{nixfmt} (now the canonical
RFC-style formatter attribute on 26.05); the checks point at the real
configurations, not the proposal's non-existent @code{bravais-v1}/@code{v4}:

@verbatim
formatter.${system} = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.${system}.nixfmt;

devShells.${system}.default = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.${system}.mkShell {
  packages = with nixpkgs.legacyPackages.${system}; [ nil nixfmt statix deadnix ];
};

checks.${system} = {
  bravais-thinkpad          = self.nixosConfigurations.bravais-thinkpad.config.system.build.toplevel;
  bravais-thinkpad-unstable = self.nixosConfigurations.bravais-thinkpad-unstable.config.system.build.toplevel;
};
@end verbatim

This makes @command{nix fmt}, @command{nix flake check}, and @command{nix
develop} work out of the box.

@section User-account de-duplication

@cindex user account
@cindex duplication
The @code{mj} account now has a single owner.  @file{users/mj/default.nix}
(documented as the system user definition) gains the @samp{seat} group it was
missing, is wired into the @code{mkBravais} module list, and the duplicate block
is removed from @file{hosts/common.nix} (its @code{root} shell and
@code{environment.shells} lines stay).  The dead, drifted copy is no longer a
trap.

@section Flatpak single owner

@cindex Flatpak
@cindex double-declaration
The redundant @code{services.flatpak.enable = true} is removed from
@file{modules/packages/system.nix}.  @file{modules/packages/flatpak.nix} already
enables the service, its remotes, and its package list behind
@code{steelbore.packages.flatpak.enable}.  With both toggles on (the default),
behaviour is unchanged; with the Flatpak toggle off, Flatpak now actually turns
off.  The @code{podman} and @code{appimage} blocks are left in place --- their
relocation is Tier 2 work, not a quick win.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
