\input texinfo   @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Mohamed Hammad <Mohamed.Hammad@SpacecraftSoftware.org>
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
@c %**start of header
@setfilename oo7.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@settitle Migrating Bravais to oo7
@c %**end of header

@set UPDATED 2026-07-20
@set VERSION 1.0

@copying
Migrating Bravais to oo7 --- a decision document for replacing
@command{gnome-keyring-daemon} with the Rust Secret Service provider.

Last updated @value{UPDATED}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Mohamed Hammad & Spacecraft Software.

@quotation
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License (CC-BY-SA-4.0). You are
free to share and adapt this material for any purpose, provided you give
appropriate credit and distribute your contributions under the same
license.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Spacecraft Software
@direntry
* oo7: (oo7).                   Migrating Bravais to the oo7 Secret Service.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Migrating Bravais to oo7
@subtitle Replacing gnome-keyring with a Rust Secret Service provider
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION} --- @value{UPDATED}
@author Mohamed Hammad
@author @email{Mohamed.Hammad@@SpacecraftSoftware.org}
@author @url{https://Bravais.SpacecraftSoftware.org/}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Migrating Bravais to oo7

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Context::                     Why this change is being considered.
* Findings::                    What was verified, and against what.
* Decisions::                   Three open decisions and their options.
* Implementation::              The module design.
* Verification::                How to prove it works.
* Risks::                       Failure modes and rollback.
@end menu


@node Context
@chapter Context

Cursor and Opera were falling back to plaintext credential storage,
surfacing as the dialog @samp{An OS keyring couldn't be identified for
storing the encryption related data}. Investigation showed the keyring
was never at fault: @command{gnome-keyring-daemon} owned
@code{org.freedesktop.secrets} and a @command{secret-tool} store, lookup
and clear round-trip succeeded.

The actual defect was Chromium's credential-backend @emph{auto-detection}.
Chromium reads @env{XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP} to select a backend; under Niri
and LeftWM that reads @samp{niri} or @samp{leftwm}, which Chromium maps to
@code{DE_OTHER}, so it skips the Secret Service entirely. That was fixed
in commit @code{458e4b0} by naming the backend explicitly for Nix-installed
Electron applications and by overriding @env{XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP} inside
the sandbox for Flatpak ones.

That fix closed the reported bug but raised a separate question. Bravais'
Secret Service provider is @command{gnome-keyring}, written in C against
GLib. The Steelbore Standard @sc{sec.}3 makes Stability Priority 1 and
names memory safety as its primary lever, and this repository is
Rust-first by convention --- @command{sudo-rs} over @command{sudo},
Sequoia over GnuPG, Nushell over Bash. A C daemon holding every stored
credential on the system is the conspicuous exception.

@uref{https://github.com/linux-credentials/oo7, oo7} is a Rust
implementation of the Secret Service API that upstream describes as a
replacement for @command{gnome-keyring-daemon}. This document records what
was verified about it, the three decisions that must be made before any
code changes, and the implementation those decisions imply.

@quotation Note
Nothing in this document has been implemented. The Chromium backend fix
(@code{458e4b0}) is live; the oo7 migration is not.
@end quotation


@node Findings
@chapter Findings

Every claim below was checked against the pinned sources in this
repository's @file{flake.lock}, or against the running host. None of it is
recalled from training data.

@section Package layout

The most important correction to the obvious assumption: @code{pkgs.oo7}
is @strong{not} the daemon. It is the command-line client only --- a
@command{secret-tool} replacement --- because its derivation sets
@code{buildAndTestSubdir = "cli"}. The daemon, portal and @acronym{PAM}
module are three further derivations that reuse the same source but build
different subdirectories under Meson.

@multitable @columnfractions .22 .30 .24 .24
@headitem Attribute @tab Contents @tab In 26.05? @tab In unstable?
@item @code{oo7}
@tab @file{bin/oo7-cli}
@tab Yes (0.6.0)
@tab Yes (0.6.0)
@item @code{oo7-server}
@tab @file{libexec/oo7-daemon}, systemd user unit, D-Bus service
@tab Yes (0.6.0)
@tab Yes (0.6.0)
@item @code{oo7-portal}
@tab @file{libexec/oo7-portal}, @code{impl.portal.Secret}
@tab Yes (0.6.0)
@tab Yes (0.6.0)
@item @code{oo7-pam}
@tab @file{lib/security/pam_oo7.so}
@tab @strong{No}
@tab Yes (0.6.0)
@end multitable

The @code{services.oo7} NixOS module likewise exists only on unstable, at
@file{nixos/modules/services/desktops/oo7.nix}. On 26.05 there is neither a
@acronym{PAM} package nor a module, so the migration must hand-roll both.

@section Channel mixing is safe here

Because @code{oo7-pam} is unstable-only, a @acronym{PAM} module built
against unstable must be loaded by a 26.05 system. That is the one place
where an @acronym{ABI} mismatch could bite. It does not apply:

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .35 .35
@headitem Component @tab nixpkgs (26.05) @tab nixpkgs-unstable
@item glibc @tab 2.42 @tab 2.42
@item linux-pam @tab 1.7.1 @tab 1.7.2
@end multitable

Identical glibc, and a patch-level @acronym{PAM} difference. The existing
@code{unstablePkgs} convention already threads unstable packages into this
configuration, so no new mechanism is needed.

@section Existing secrets survive

oo7's file backend writes the same magic header as gnome-keyring
(@code{GnomeKeyring\n\r\0\n}), reads the legacy v0 format from
@file{~/.local/share/keyrings/}, and maps the @samp{login} collection alias
to @samp{default} with an explicit compatibility comment in
@file{server/src/service/mod.rs}. The daemon discovers both generations at
startup: @file{keyrings/v1} first, then the v0 files beside it.

@section There is no runtime unlock

This is the finding that most shapes the design. Upstream documents
exactly two unlock paths, both of which act at daemon @emph{start}:

@table @asis
@item @option{--login}
Reads the password from standard input, or prompts if attached to a
@acronym{TTY}.
@item systemd credential
The daemon loads a credential named
@code{oo7.keyring-encryption-password}, which requires systemd 258 or
newer. The host runs systemd 260, so this is available.
@end table

There is @strong{no} D-Bus unlock call and @strong{no} @command{oo7-cli}
unlock subcommand. The current @command{steelbore-keyring-unlock} script
works by piping a password into
@code{gnome-keyring-daemon --unlock --replace}; that has no direct
equivalent, so the script cannot survive unchanged.

@section gnome-keyring is enabled transitively

@file{hosts/common.nix} enables all five desktop modules, and nixpkgs'
GNOME module sets @code{services.gnome.gnome-keyring.enable = true} on its
own. Both daemons claim @code{org.freedesktop.secrets}, so the name would
be contested unless gnome-keyring is forced off.

@quotation Correction
The comment presently at @file{modules/core/keyring.nix} lines 26--28,
which claims @samp{nothing else pulls this in}, is wrong. GNOME does. It
should be corrected regardless of which option below is chosen.
@end quotation


@node Decisions
@chapter Decisions

Three decisions must be made before implementation. Each is presented with
its options, the tradeoff, and a recommendation.

@menu
* Unlock path::                 How the keyring gets unlocked.
* gnome-keyring disposition::   How far to remove the incumbent.
* Rollout::                     How the change lands.
@end menu


@node Unlock path
@section Decision 1 --- Unlock path

Because oo7 unlocks only at daemon start (@pxref{Findings}), the
fingerprint-login path needs explicit thought. Today
@code{pam_fprintd} is @samp{sufficient} ahead of @code{pam_unix} in the
greetd stack, so a successful fingerprint scan means no password token
ever reaches the keyring's @acronym{PAM} module --- which is precisely why
@kbd{Mod+Shift+U} exists.

@table @strong
@item (a) PAM plus a rewritten @kbd{Mod+Shift+U}
Inject @file{pam_oo7.so} into greetd's auth, session and password stacks,
mirroring today's @code{enableGnomeKeyring}. Fingerprint logins still leave
the keyring locked, so @command{steelbore-keyring-unlock} is rewritten to
stop the daemon and restart it with @option{--login} on standard input.

@emph{Closest to current behaviour. Introduces no new secret at rest.}

@item (b) systemd credential, @acronym{TPM}-sealed
Store the password once with @command{systemd-creds encrypt --user
--name=oo7.keyring-encryption-password}. The daemon loads it at start, so
the keyring auto-unlocks on @emph{every} login including fingerprint,
retiring the @kbd{Mod+Shift+U} workaround entirely.

@emph{Fixes a real gap in today's setup. But upstream states plainly that
any user who can read the blob and reach the @acronym{TPM} --- root, for
instance --- can decrypt it.}

@item (c) Both
@acronym{PAM} primary, credential as the fingerprint fallback. Retires the
workaround while keeping normal logins off the credstore path.

@emph{Carries option (b)'s exposure anyway, and leaves two unlock paths to
reason about.}
@end table

@subheading Recommendation

Option @strong{(a)} for the first landing. It changes one variable rather
than two, and keeps the secret-at-rest posture identical to today. Option
(b) is a genuine improvement on the current fingerprint gap and is worth
revisiting once oo7 has proven itself on this machine --- but it should not
ride along with the daemon swap, because if something misbehaves you want
to know which change caused it.


@node gnome-keyring disposition
@section Decision 2 --- gnome-keyring disposition

Both daemons claim @code{org.freedesktop.secrets}. The name must be
uncontested, which means @code{lib.mkForce false} at minimum --- a plain
@code{false} will not survive GNOME's transitive enable.

@table @strong
@item (a) Force off, keep installed
Set @code{services.gnome.gnome-keyring.enable = lib.mkForce false}, but
leave the package in @code{systemPackages} so
@code{gnome-keyring-daemon --unlock} remains available for manual recovery.
Both daemons read the same store, so nothing is stranded.

@item (b) Full removal
Force off @emph{and} drop @code{gnome-keyring} and @code{seahorse} from
@code{systemPackages}. Cleanest end state, with no ambiguity about which
daemon is live --- at the cost of the recovery tool, should oo7 fail to
read an existing keyring.
@end table

@subheading Recommendation

Option @strong{(a)}. Priority 1 asks for graceful degradation, and keeping
the incumbent reader on disk is close to free. It is the only in-place
recovery path that does not require a rebuild.


@node Rollout
@section Decision 3 --- Rollout

A malformed greetd @acronym{PAM} stack does not degrade gracefully. It
means no login at all.

@table @strong
@item (a) Cut over @code{bravais-thinkpad}
Apply directly to the stable configuration. Rollback is the previous NixOS
generation from the bootloader, which is reliable --- but recovery costs a
reboot.

@item (b) Trial on @code{bravais-thinkpad-unstable} first
Land it there, boot that generation, verify login and keyring, then
promote to stable. Slower, but the stable generation stays known-good
throughout.

@item (c) Cut over with a @acronym{TTY} escape hatch
Apply to stable, but first confirm that an unmodified @acronym{PAM} service
or a root @acronym{TTY} autologin exists, so a broken greetd stack does not
require a reboot to fix.
@end table

@subheading Recommendation

Option @strong{(c)}. It costs one verification step and converts the
failure mode from @samp{reboot into an older generation} to @samp{switch
virtual terminal}. Option (b) is the conservative fallback if the escape
hatch cannot be confirmed.


@node Implementation
@chapter Implementation

Contingent on the decisions above. The shape below assumes the
recommended options (a), (a), (c).

@section The module

Rewrite @file{modules/core/keyring.nix} to reproduce what unstable's
@code{services.oo7} module does, but with 26.05 option names and
@code{unstablePkgs} for all four components. Taking all four from unstable
avoids a split @emph{within} oo7 itself, and unstable's @code{oo7-server}
carries a @code{postFixup} that rewrites the unit's @code{ExecStart} to
@file{/run/wrappers/bin/oo7-daemon} --- which is why the setcap wrapper
below is mandatory rather than optional.

@verbatim
services.gnome.gnome-keyring.enable = lib.mkForce false;  # GNOME sets it transitively

services.dbus.packages = [ unstablePkgs.oo7-server ];
systemd.packages       = [ unstablePkgs.oo7-server ];
systemd.user.services.oo7-daemon.wantedBy = [ "default.target" ];

security.wrappers.oo7-daemon = {
  owner = "root";
  group = "root";
  capabilities = "cap_ipc_lock=ep";                       # mlock secrets out of swap
  source = "${unstablePkgs.oo7-server}/libexec/oo7-daemon";
};

xdg.portal.extraPortals = [ unstablePkgs.oo7-portal ];
@end verbatim

@section PAM

26.05's @file{pam.nix} has no @code{oo7} option, so the module must be
injected by hand through
@code{security.pam.services.greetd.rules.@{auth,session,password@}} using
@code{unstablePkgs.oo7-pam}. Mirror the @code{gnome_keyring} rules already
in 26.05's @file{pam.nix} (lines 1255, 1468 and 1686) for control and
ordering: @code{optional} throughout, @code{use_authtok} on password,
@code{auto_start} on session.

Note that upstream's own module wires only @code{security.pam.services.login}.
Bravais logs in through greetd, so that stack is ours to configure.

@section Portal

oo7's @file{.portal} file declares @code{UseIn=gnome}. Under Niri and
LeftWM the Secret portal will therefore not resolve unless a
@file{portals.conf} names it explicitly:

@verbatim
[preferred]
org.freedesktop.impl.portal.Secret=oo7-portal;
@end verbatim

@section Other edits

@table @file
@item modules/login/default.nix
Drop @code{security.pam.services.greetd.enableGnomeKeyring} (line 339).

@item modules/desktops/shared.nix
Rewrite @command{steelbore-keyring-unlock} (lines 131--149) to stop the
daemon and restart it with @option{--login}. Under Decision 1(b) the script
and its keybindings would instead be deleted --- @file{users/mj/niri.nix}
line 175, @file{modules/desktops/leftwm.nix} line 209, and the cheatsheet
entry at line 309.

@item users/mj/desktop-theme.nix
The @file{gnome-keyring-ssh.desktop} suppression (lines 84--94) becomes
dead once gnome-keyring is off, since oo7 ships no SSH agent. Remove it,
then confirm @env{SSH_AUTH_SOCK} still resolves to gitway-agent.

@item modules/core/security.nix
@code{services.gnome.gcr-ssh-agent.enable = false} stays. @acronym{GCR} is
independent of the Secret Service provider.
@end table

@section What does not change

These target the Secret Service @emph{interface} rather than its
implementation, and are expected to keep working untouched:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{steelbore.keyring.chromiumFlag} and its four editor wrappers.
@item
The eight Flatpak @env{XDG_CURRENT_DESKTOP} overrides.
@item
@code{libsecret} and @command{secret-tool}.
@item
The three shells' @env{SSH_AUTH_SOCK} overrides --- those defend against
@acronym{PAM}, not against the daemon.
@end itemize


@node Verification
@chapter Verification

@section Build time

@verbatim
makeinfo --no-split oo7.texi          # this document: zero errors, zero warnings
git add -A
nix build --no-link --print-out-paths \
  '.#nixosConfigurations.bravais-thinkpad.config.system.build.toplevel'
@end verbatim

@section Before switching

The login-lockout guard. Inspect the generated stack in the built closure
@emph{before} activating it:

@verbatim
rg -n 'pam_oo7|pam_gnome_keyring' <closure>/etc/pam.d/greetd
@end verbatim

@section After switching

@verbatim
busctl --user list | rg 'org.freedesktop.secrets'   # must be oo7-daemon, not gnome-keyring
systemctl --user status oo7-daemon

echo hunter2 | secret-tool store --label=oo7-test test oo7
secret-tool lookup test oo7 && secret-tool clear test oo7
@end verbatim

@section End to end

None of the above proves the user-visible goal. These do:

@enumerate
@item
Log out and back in @emph{with a password}; the keyring should unlock with
no prompt.
@item
Log in @emph{with a fingerprint}; the Decision 1 unlock path should behave
as designed.
@item
Launch Cursor. The @samp{OS keyring couldn't be identified} dialog must not
appear.
@item
Launch Opera (Flatpak) and confirm saved passwords persist across a
restart.
@item
Confirm pre-existing secrets from @file{~/.local/share/keyrings/} are still
readable.
@end enumerate


@node Risks
@chapter Risks

@table @strong
@item Login lockout
A malformed greetd @acronym{PAM} stack blocks every login. Mitigated by
Decision 3 and by inspecting the generated @file{/etc/pam.d/greetd} before
switching.

@item Maturity
oo7 0.6.0 is a 0.x daemon replacing a mature one, on a channel that does
not officially support it. Priority 1 names memory safety as its primary
lever, but the same section also requires test-verified stability and
graceful degradation. The staged rollout and the retained gnome-keyring
binary are the concession to that tension --- it is a real tension, not a
reason to abandon the migration.

@item Keyring format
oo7 reads the legacy v0 files but writes its own v1 format. Once a keyring
has been written as v1, gnome-keyring can no longer read it, which means
the rollback path degrades after first write. @strong{Back up
@file{~/.local/share/keyrings/} before the first switch.}

@item Unstable drift
Taking four packages from @code{nixpkgs-unstable} means the @command{rebuild}
routine's unstable bump can move oo7 underneath the configuration. This is
consistent with the existing @code{unstablePkgs} convention, but deserves a
note in @file{PRD.md}.
@end table

@section Documents to update afterwards

@file{PRD.md} section 5.6 (rewrite the Keyring section), @file{TODO.md}
lines 45--50 (the keyring checklist), and the known-constraints list in
@file{CLAUDE.md} if the stable/unstable split needs recording.

@bye
